[Music] geopolitics is the formation of grand strategy within a geographical template the great game in the early 19th century napoleon almost established a dominion over europe but napoleon was defeated at waterloo in 1815. at the congress of vienna the victorious nations russia britain austria and prussia divided europe to create between them a power equilibrium preventing any single nation from being able to repeat napoleon's feet of continental european domination of these nations britain and russia were the two main victors over napoleon defeating him on land and at sea these were not just great powers in europe but global empires britain had already in the 18th century established her dominion in india the jewel in her crown the royal navy ensured communications between england and india the other great empire russia was an enormous landmass that extended across eurasia and whose southern expansion could bring her to the gates of india british fears over this notion prompted the great game the geopolitical rivalry for eurasian preeminence which lasted the rest of the 19th century after annexing transcaucasia now georgia in 1812 russia established a southern base of operations beyond the trans-caucasian mountains that extended her military influence in persia now iran her southern neighbour britain was concerned that russia's expanding sphere of influence would allow her to invade india these fears pushed britain to expand her frontiers in india north resulting in the unsuccessful afghan campaign of 1839 back in europe russian armies helped prussia and austria suppress uprisings in their own territories in 1848 the year of revolutions expanding her influence further more importantly russia was making the ottoman empire increasingly more reliant on her to upkeep its possessions establishing an effective protectorate over it the british government worriedly began to observe these developments in particular russia's possible control of constantinople which would allow russia's black sea fleet into the mediterranean from crimea ultimately this resulted in the crimean war of 1853-6 although britain with the help of france and the ottomans won the crimean war reaffirming britain as the leading sea power it did not stop russia from expanding on land in central asia by the turn of the 20th century only afghanistan stood between them [Music] the anglo-russian rivalry in asia influenced the british geographer halsford mckinder and avowed imperialist and social darwinist to conceptualize a grand theory of geopolitics in his 1904 paper the geographical pivot of history out of considerations for british imperial statecraft planning for the future mckinder devised the heartland thesis the heartland is the inner eurasian landmass surrounded by mountainous frontiers everywhere apart from in eastern europe his dictum was who controls eastern europe controls the heartland who controls the heartland controls the world island controls the world he feared that an industrializing russian empire as the 20th century continued which occupied the heartland would through the development of rail lines out of european russia be able rapidly to transport armies from europe east and south to invade india and expand in the far east to prevent russia from reaching the indian ocean he proposed containment by the british empire but world war intervened and history brought russia and britain together to fight the world wars against germany and japan then russia in 1917 was plunged into revolution during this period the heartland imploded and reformed as the soviet union after the world wars that took place between 1914 and 1945 a bipolar world emerged between the liberal democracies and the communist soviet union the heartland thesis was adapted by the us for its containment strategy of the soviet union nicholas speakman a dutchman working for the americans revised mckinder's theory to emphasize that the eurasian rim land was a more important region than the heartland for american interests [Music] historically it was in the rimland where eurasia's civilizations were spawned along the silk route in many ways during the cold war the united states became the geopolitical heir to the british empire and its navy as it now took the mantle of the sea power containing the heartland along the rim studies of british imperial grand strategy influenced a range of u.s theorists most notably george cannon henry kissinger and jebignier brzezinski until this day the us sees eurasia as a chessboard and its game is against russia and china the rimland continues to hold the world's main geopolitical hotspots ukraine syria iraq iran afghanistan kashmir north korea and the south china sea as a legacy of the containment strategy after the collapse of the soviet union in 1991 we entered a unipolar world with the us as sole superpower and russian influence waning kissinger's phd a world restored examined how britain balanced european powers after the defeat of napoleon and so kissinger sought to balance eurasia during soviet containment post-world war ii by aligning china against its ideological ally the ussr although china had been a major player in the great game for thousands of years the british empire successfully put it to sleep with the opium wars and subjected it to a century of what it saw as humiliation with the british colony at hong kong between 1897 and 1997. in 1971 kissinger took nixon to meet chairman mao and open up china to u.s trade in an attempt to circumscribe the ussr with an expanded american sphere of influence with the u.s distracted in the middle east after 2001 the great game realigned to become a rivalry between the us and a reinvigorated china expanding its own sphere of influence west along the rimland and the old silk road to europe and africa with its one belt one road policy the trump administration has realigned the us as a pacific power in a trade war with china again trump is now seeking to separate china from its potential allies in russia and north korea the great game continues [Music]

Hello and welcome. Since our channel is dedicated particularly to geopolitics, our first video ever could only be to answer the question: What is Geopolitics? Geopolitics is the study of place. How a country’s geography influences its politics and international relations based on constraints such as resources, climate, demographics, transportation, military power, technology, politics, economics, agriculture or energy. It helps us understand why events take place, why nations sign trade deals or go to war, why alliances are formed and rivalries are born. Nations need to secure resources, protect their territory including borderlands and manage their populations. The term geopolitics was first used by the Swedish political scientist Rudolf Kjellén, a student of the German geographer Friedrich Ratzel. His ideas formed what is known today as the perspective of “classical” Geopolitics, that the power of a state relates to its geographic location and control over territory. Other important names in the field include American naval officer and historian, Alfred Thayer Mahan, English geographer, academic and politician Sir Halford Mackinder and German General and geographer Karl Haushofer. The world’s regions are classified according to their geostrategic importance and that is clearly shown in the historic 1904 article titled “The Geographical Pivot of History” or as it is also known: “The Heartland Theory”, written by Sir Halford Mackinder. In the “Heartland Theory” the land mass that stretches from Eastern Europe to Asia, from the Volga River in Russia to the Yangtze in China, is regarded as a “Pivot Area”, which, if controlled by a single political entity, would put it in prime position for global supremacy. The term geopolitics was dropped from public discourse for decades after Adolf Hitler used the ideas of Kjellén and Raztel as a justification for German expansionism. Although geopolitics as a whole was denounced by Nazi ideologues, its misuse resulted in its discredit. As a result, after WWII the term “geopolitics” was regarded as a Nazi expression until former U.S. Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger reintroduced the term in political debates in the 1970s. He was followed Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Adviser to President Jimmy Carter between 1977 and 1981. In his 1997 book “The Grand Chessboard”, Brzezinski pinpoints the geographic areas critical for American foreign policy in the post-soviet period, which is in a way a continuation of the idea expressed in the Heartland Theory, written more than 90 years earlier. It is through geopolitics that analysts attempt to predict the actions and decisions of nations or other forms of political power and forecast the future. Thank you so much for watching, we hope that you’ve liked this video and we will see you next time.

Hello and welcome to ‘A geopolitical tour of the world’. In this video I’m going to take you on a guided journey around the globe, talking to you about some disputes, oddities, complexities, or just some things that are good to be aware of in this complicated planet we live on. Some of the things I’ll be talking about, I already have entire videos on, if you want a deeper understanding. We’ll start at the “centre of the world”, the prime meridian, which goes through Greenwich, England. This is because that’s where the British invented time in 1884. Here we have two independent countries: the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the Republic of Ireland. The country of Ireland comprises the majority of the island of Ireland, while the northern part, called Northern Ireland, is 1 of the 4 constituent countries of the United Kingdom. Northern Ireland doesn’t really have an official flag because its population doesn’t exactly agree on whether they should remain British or unite with the rest of Ireland. The other 3 constituent countries are in Great Britain and surrounding minor islands… Scotland, England, and Wales. Some people use the terms “Great Britain”, “United Kingdom”, and “England” interchangeably… but please don’t. Us Scots really don’t appreciate it. In fact, many Scots don’t want to be part of the UK. Despite an unsuccessful referendum in 2014, there’s still a very sizable independence movement. Even more so since Brexit. So just remember… Great Britain: an island, the UK: an independent country made up of 4 non-independent countries… and England: one of those 4 countries. Oh, and there’s also the Isle of Man, Jersey, and Guernsey. Which are British, but not part of the UK for some reason. They’re referred to as Crown Dependencies. Okay we really need to move on, lots to cover. If we go into the icy north, we find the Faroe Islands, and Greenland. Two places that you wouldn’t think have much in common, but they do, they’re both Danish. They’re both autonomous territories of Denmark. And despite the immense difference in size between the two, they actually both have a similar population of around 50,000. Unsurprisingly, Greenland is one of the least densely populated parts of the world. The island is literally ¾ ice. Now moving onto land with a more… hospitable climate: mainland Europe. First thing to talk about is probably the European Union, an economic and political union of 27 European States. It used to be 28, but, y’know Brexit. The EU has what’s called “the Schengen Area”, an area of free travel, in which participating countries have abolished border controls. Not ALL members of the EU are part of this area, and also some non-EU members ARE. Same with the Eurozone, a monetary union in which all countries use a shared currency, the Euro. 19 of the 27 members are part of the Eurozone. 4 countries have agreements with the EU to officially use the Euro despite not being part of the EU, and then two others just sort of decided that they wanted it too, without any agreement in place. Now given how much Europeans loved conquering the world for a few centuries, there are plenty of parts of European countries, outside of Europe. Like the large part of France in South America, or smaller islands off the coast of Madagascar. Of course, I won’t be able to cover them all. Just a quick mention about the Vatican City, which is considered a country (the smallest in the world, entirely surrounded by Italy), but is NOT a member of the United Nations… although it is an observer State. Okay, to Spain next. This region here is called Catalonia, it’s one of the 17 “autonomous communities” of Spain. Many Catalans have been fighting for independence from Spain over the last century, with things picking up over the last decade. Catalonia sought permission from Madrid to hold an independence referendum. Spain said no. Catalonia said they’ll do it anyway. Spain said “wait no that’s illegal”. But they did it anyway. The result was 92% in favour of independence, BUT everyone who wanted to remain part of Spain just boycotted the vote, so it doesn’t really count. The President of Catalonia later declared independence… sort of? It was all very confusing and nobody really knows what happened. Catalonia is still part of Spain, though, and their former president is currently living in self-imposed exile in Belgium. On the southern coast of the Iberian peninsula, there’s Gibraltar, an overseas British territory, which was ceded from Spain about 300 years ago. And just across the Mediterranean, there are a couple of parts of Africa that are still part of Spain. Alright, what’s next… ah yes, the Balkans. This is a part of Europe in which everyone hates each other. Probably the biggest point of contention is the self-declared, partially-recognised State of Kosovo. Or the autonomous Serbian province of Kosovo, depending on your viewpoint. The province declared its independence in 2008, after a war with Serbia a few years earlier, in which Kosovo received military support from NATO. The population of Kosovo is prodimently Albanian. As well as this, there was also the near 3-decade naming dispute between Greece and Mace-- uh, North Macedonia, as it’s now called. Basically Macedonia is a large geographic region, much of which is in Greece, and was named as such after the ancient Greek kingdom of Macedon. So Greece wasn’t too happy in 1991 when their neighbour declared independence from Yugoslavia as the “Republic of Macedonia”. Due to Greek objections, the country was referred to as “the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia” in diplomatic organisations like the UN. After 28 years the insanity was finally ended and the country was renamed the “Republic of North Macedonia”. But I’m pretty sure neither side was really happy with the outcome and they both still hate each other. On to Russia now. This is the Crimean Peninsula. It was annexed by Russia from Ukraine in 2014 after a referendum of... questionable legitimacy. It was only actually part of Ukraine for about half a century, since it was transferred to Ukraine while both were Soviet Republics. Western governments and the UN do not recognise the annexation, and still consider the peninsula to be part of Ukraine. Nothing has actually been done about it, though. One more part of Russia that’s good to be aware of, is this small exclave here called the ‘Kaliningrad Oblast’. It was originally part of the German state of Prussia, but the Soviet Union claimed it after the Allies’ victory in WWII… and then after the fall of the Soviet Union it became completely cut off from the rest of Russia.. Now travelling to Russia’s southern border with Georgia. Georgia has a somewhat precarious political situation, as it has not one, but TWO parts of the country that have declared their independence – Abkahzia, and South Ossetia. Both States have control over the areas they claim, however they very much lack international recognition. Both States declared their independence in the 1990s with backing from Russia. There was even a brief war over the dispute between Georgia and Russia in 2008. No prizes for guessing how that turned out… Next we’ll take a trip down to the Mediterranean, to the beautiful summer getaway of Cyprus. The political situation here though, is a bit ugly. The island is currently divided between the country of Cyprus, and the unrecognised Turkish republic of Northern Cyprus. There’s a UN buffer zone separating the two political entities that was established after the inter-ethnic violence between the Greeks and the Turks of the island erupted in the 1960s, shortly after Cyprus became independent from the UK. There was a Greek coup, followed by Turkish invasion, and it all got very messy. Oh, and there’s also some British bases on the island. I guess the strategic location was just too valuable to give up… Moving further south and onto Africa. Probably the most noticeable geopolitical dispute in Africa is an area known as Western Sahara. The region is claimed (and mostly controlled by) Morocco. But the region has also been proclaimed as the independent country of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, by the indigenous rebel group the Polisario Front, which started off by fighting against Spanish colonial rule in the 1970s. In 1976, Spain just sort-of noped out of the whole situation, and divided the region between Morocco, and another neighbouring country, Mauritania, who also claimed the region at the time... but not anymore. On the opposite coast of Africa, we have Somaliland. Which, once again, is a dispute caused by the Europeans. Somaliland was controlled by the British, while the rest of what is today the country of Somalia, was controlled by Italy. In 1960 the two were joined to make a new, independent country. Somaliland declared independence in 1991, and a civil war has been ongoing ever since. Now moving onto the Middle Eas-- oh ****... (SIGH) Why am I doing this?! Okay, so it is quite literally impossible to give any kind of explanation of what the hell is going on here in just a couple of minutes. So just keep in mind everything I say here is going to be way oversimplified. Before the beginning of the currently ongoing situation, this area was called Palestine, and was under British administration. In 1948, the United Nations passed a resolution to partition the land between Jewish and Arab communities. The descendants of these Arab communities, in this region and in refugee camps nearby, are what we today call Palestinians. After the resolution was passed, the State of Israel was declared. This led to the first of several wars with its neighbors, in which Israel was often fighting against most (or all) of them at once. Territory in this region has bounced back and forth between different countries and organizations MANY times. Today, Israel is also in control of the Golan Heights, which it captured from Syria in 1967. Now, as well as Israel, we also have the State of Palestine, declared in 1988, which is a partially-recognised state, with observer status at the United Nations. Its claimed territory is the West Bank, in which an interim division agreement was reached with Israel in the 90s, as well as the Gaza strip, which has actually been controlled by Hamas since 2007, a Palestinian political party, and variously described as a terrorist organization. Things are even more complicated in Jerusalem, an ancient city with profound significance to Jews, Muslims, and Christians. This city is fully controlled by Israel but claimed by both groups as their capital - though with different parts of the city being claimed by each group. On top of all of this, there’s the issue of Israeli settlements, which we don’t have time to get into and I’d really like to move on now please… Staying in the Middle East, there’s the situation in Syria, in which a devastating, multi-sided civil war has been ongoing for nearly 10 years now. This began with a series of anti-government protests, part of the broader movement known as the Arab Spring, which were violently suppressed. The conflict is one of the bloodiest of the 21st century, and has spilled over to several neighbouring countries. There’s also the situation in Iraq. There is still ongoing conflict that stemmed from the US-led invasion in 2003 to topple the government of Saddam Hussein. With ISIS having mostly lost their territory in Iraq, the violence has continued in the form of an insurgency, featuring several rebel groups. ISIS was defeated in the civil war with help from the Kurds, a distinct ethnic group in northern Iraq that is seeking independence. The people overwhelmingly voted in favour of independence, but the Iraqi government deemed the referendum illegal. Alright, let’s move east of the… Middle East, and onto the Indian subcontinent, where we find the disputed region of Jammu and Kashmir. Basically, this area was a “Princely State” of India while under British control, and in 1947 when India was divided into India and Pakistan, disagreements about which country to join caused conflict, and a de facto partition of the region that remains unresolved to this day. Around here, there’s also several territorial disputes between India and China along their extensive border. All of which are controlled by China. And speaking of China, there’s plenty here to talk about, too. We’ve got Tibet, Hong Kong, Taiwan… and probably much more that we don’t have time for. So, Tibet. Tibet is an autonomous region of the People’s Republic of China. The Tibetan people are ethnically distinct from the Han Chinese majority, but the area has been under Chinese control for 300 years. However, when imperial rule in China came to end with the fall of the Qing Dynasty in 1912, Tibet experienced a few decades of de facto independence. This is when China became a republic for the first time. However, when a civil war broke out between the government and a communist rebellion, the communists won, and proclaimed the People’s Republic of China. The new communist government annexed Tibet in 1951, albeit with resistance from Tibet’s 8,000-strong army. Now, that civil war that was won by the communists… the losing side, the Republic of China, didn’t just disappear. In fact, this brings us to our next stop, Taiwan. This is where the republican/nationalist government fled to in 1949. While this country is commonly referred to as “Taiwan”, its name is actually unchanged to this day, the Republic of China. China still views Taiwan as part of its territory, despite the People’s Republic never having any jurisdiction over the island in their history. Taiwan has its own government, president, military, etc etc.. and is just like any other country in most ways. However, given how powerful China is, officially acknowledging Taiwan means China cutting all ties, both diplomatic and, more importantly, economic. Taiwan is not a member of the UN, but plenty of countries have unofficial relations with Taipei. There’s also Hong Kong, which is part of China, but has a special administrative status, under the so-called “one China, two systems” policy. Mass protests took place throughout much of 2019 when a controversial extradition bill was proposed. Even after the bill was withdrawn, protests continued for full democracy, with a list of 5 demands. Protesters were often subject to police brutality and arrest. Hong Kong used to be British until 1997, when it was transferred back to China, with a 50-year agreement that Hong Kong would not be subject to mainland China’s economic system. Literally no-one knows what will happen in 2047 when this agreement expires. Closeby, there’s also North and South Korea. Korea had been annexed by Japan in 1910, but then with the Japanese defeat in WWII, the peninsula was to be… temporarily divided. The Soviet Union controlled the north, and the United States the south, with the plan to unify Korea into one country. Buuuut then the Cold War happened and suddenly the two countries controlling Korea hated each other, and were less willing to cooperate. There was a 3-year war which didn’t really accomplish much except massive casualties on both sides… North Korea is the most isolated country in the world, with its population unable to leave, and with little knowledge of the outside world. North Korea has nuclear weapons though, hence the lack of intervention... Elsewhere in Asia to be aware of… there’s a country that nobody really knows what to call it – Burma or Myanmar. And there’s also the South China Sea, which is the most disputed part of the entire planet. Claimed by like.. 40 countries of something. Probably. Where do we go from here… uh, we can probably just skip over Australia and all that down there, they’re pretty chill, not too much to talk about. Let’s instead, go all the way across the Pacific Ocean, which is mostly empty except for Hawaii which is part of the United States but has a Union Jack on its flag for some reason. So now we’re in the Americas. North and South America. Although some people, especially from Latin America, refer to them as one continent… America, singular. However, English speakers generally use this word to refer to the country, the United States. There’s plenty going on in the Caribbean. There are 13 independent nations, most of which no-one has ever heard of, as well as European colonies and territories, and also a random part of Colombia. Cool flag though. Oh, and Puerto Rico, that wants to awkwardly add a 51st star to the American flag. A particularly peculiar case is with a bunch of Dutch islands… Aruba, Curaçao, and Sint Maarten, which are actually countries within the Kingdom of the Netherlands, making up 4 constituent countries, along with the Netherlands itself. Somewhat similar to the UK. But then within the constituent country of the Netherlands, there are 3 more Caribbean islands, Bonaire, St Eustatius, and Saba. Here’s a Venn diagram to help you out. Elsewhere in the Americas… there’s the Falkland Islands. British Islands with British people, who near-unanimously voted to remain a British territory, but for some reason Argentina claims them as their own. They even fought a brief war in 1982 when Argentina invaded the islands… but this only happened because a dictator was trying to distract his people from the country’s failing economy. Let’s see, what else. Well, there’s Antarctica. Which is mostly just ice and snow, but hey, it’s land, so countries will try to stick a flag in it and claim it as their own. Because why not at this point. There are various claims to the continent, some of which overlap, as well as some unclaimed land, but it’s all mostly irrelevant because of the Antarctic Treaty. This treaty has suspended all new claims, guarantees freedom for scientific exploration, and a ban of all military activity. Sometimes when we look at the world, the lines on a map don’t fully do justice to the situation on the ground. You often have to look beyond the borders and see what lies beneath. Geopolitics can be both complicated and fascinating in equal measure, and it’s always good to know what’s going on in the world. A great way to keep yourself informed is by watching documentaries on CuriosityStream. An online streaming service with thousands of titles on science, technology, history, lifestyle, and so much more. I recently watched a great documentary about tsunamis, and how scientists are trying to learn more and more about them to help better prepare for future disasters. You can start watching for just 2.99 a month by signing up at CuriousityStream.com/wonderwhy. With your subscription, you’ll also get access to Nebula - a streaming service for independent creators. Nebula has a lot of original content, such as the multi-creator series, Working Titles, a series dedicated to TV shows with great opening title sequences. Recently I made an episode about the greatest sitcom of all time. Go check it out! Again, that’s CuriousityStream.com/wonderwhy. Thanks so much for watching, see you next time.