Speak like a leader:

Translator: Irina Lutsenko Reviewer: Ellen Maloney Speech writing must be one of the weirdest jobs in the world. No matter how carefully the words have been prepared, you are never quite sure how they are gonna be delivered. Yesterday, I was in London, and I was watching one of my clients, who is a big Australian businessman, deliver a speech that I'd written for him. I'd written for him this passage, kind of with Winston Churchill in mind, about how we've got to fight for our future, fight to protect our position, fight our competitors. And I'd forgotten about the Australian accent. And I watched from the back of the room with horror as I saw him go, "We've got to 'fart' for our future, 'fart' to protect our position, and I'll tell you what, folks, when I wake up every morning, there is one thing I know for sure I'm gonna do that day; 'fart'!" (Laughter) (Applause) So today I'm gonna share with you some speechwriter secrets. I don't know whether you know this, but there is a secret language of leadership; a secret language of leadership that we all used to be taught at school. Ancient rhetoric. This was a core part of the curriculum in Ancient Rome, part of the trivium. In London, right the way through to the 19th century, it was possible to get a free education in rhetoric, but not in mathematics, reflecting the importance that was placed on the topic. Today, teaching in rhetoric is restricted; restricted to a powerful, privileged few. So what I'm gonna do in my speech is revive this ancient art of rhetoric and share with you six techniques so that you can all speak like leaders. So right, okay, stop. Right, stop listen. Look left, look right, look center. How are you feeling? Distressed? Anxious? Little bit edgy? That's because I'm mimicking, hyperventilating. This is the authentic sound of fear, and that fear transfers to you. This is an ancient Roman rhetorical device; they used to call it asyndeton. And it's one leaders still use today. So David Cameron uses it: "Broken homes, failing schools, sink estates." Tony Blair used to use it as well: "Education, education. education." Barack Obama too: "A world at war, a planet in peril, the worst financial crisis in a generation. Why three? Well, three is the magic number in rhetoric. "Government of the people, by the people, for the people." (In German) "One people, one empire, one leader." (In Italian) "Eat well, laugh often, love much." (Applause) That was the hardest part of this speech to practice, so thank you for the applause. This is also an ancient Roman rhetorical device. They used to call it tricolon, which makes it sound like a peculiar part of the digestive system. But it's just putting things in threes. You put your argument in threes, it makes it sound more compelling, more convincing, more credible. Just like that. And so we find the rule of three here, there, and everywhere. And so indeed you can tell the history of Verona through nothing more than the rule of three. If you think that Caesar used to come here 2,000 years ago, "Veni, vidi, vici." 400 years ago, Shakespeare wrote "Romeo and Juliet," which was set here. "Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou, Romeo?" But of course, far and away the most momentous event in Verona's history - today's TEDx; "Reinvent. Rethink. Relay." Right. Let's move on; number two. (Applause) Three sentences in which the opening clause is repeated. Now this is what Winston Churchill did with his, "We shall fight on the beaches, we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight on the fields and in the streets." Of course, he could have said this a whole lot quicker. But he wanted to communicate his emotion, so he repeated it. When we are emotional about things, our perspective distorts. And this then manifests in our speech. And so this is the authentic sound of passion. I love Verona. I love Italy. I love pasta. I love tiramisu. I love all of you. I love the excitement, I love the energy, I love the enthusiasm here in this room; Are you feeling my passion? You should be because I am a speech writer and I know how to make a point. It sweeps people away. And this is why this technique is used by slick salesmen and by market traders. "I'm not asking £20, I'm not asking £15, I'm not even asking 10 pounds." It sweeps people onto the next point, which is free balance in statements. "Ask not what your country can do for you, ask what you can do for your country." "There is nothing wrong with America that can't be cured by what's right with America." "To be or not to be." If the sentence sounds as if it's balanced, we imagine that the underlying thinking is balanced, and our brain is tuned to like things that are balanced. Balanced minds, balanced diets, balanced lives. And so we are drawn to these kinds of sentences, we are attracted to them even if that balance is actually just an illusion. Like, we're looking to the future, not the past. We're working together, not against one another. We're thinking about what we can do, not what we can't. Now let's move on to number four. Metaphor. Metaphor is probably the most powerful piece of political communication. But it's the bit no one ever talks about, the elephant in the room, so to speak, which is extraordinary because we use metaphor once every 16 words on average. So our conversation is littered with metaphors, scattered with metaphors. We can't speak for very long without reaching for a metaphor, and metaphors are very loaded. See, metaphors are all over the place, and they are political in that they are used by people to lead people towards things, or indeed to make them recoil. And so we use beautiful images, images of people, images of love, images of family, of sunshine, in order to draw people towards things, and we use disgusting images- vermin, scary monsters, disease, sickness, in order to make people recoil. And they're all lies, and they are never challenged. And yet they have an enormous impact on the way that people behave and respond. There's been research showing changing nothing more than the metaphor in a piece of text can lead to fundamentally different reactions from people on questions ranging from whether or not they'll invest in a company, whether or not they will back particular crime policies to even whether or not they'll support a foreign war. And so this is really important stuff. and it's all around us. So let me just take three of the big metaphors - three is the magic number - three of the big metaphors that are around at the moment. "The Arab Spring". You've all heard of The Arab Spring. You can't talk about what's going on in the Middle East without calling it an Arab Spring. "The Arab Spring". Sun's shining, flowers blooming. This is a time of regrowth, rebirth, rejuvenation. And yet it's a big lie, isn't it? Even the most optimistic, geopolitical experts look at the Middle East and say this is going to take two generations to recover. It's not an Arab Spring; it's an Arab Inferno. Take another one; "The Calais Jungle". Now this a phrase that has really taken root, metaphorically speaking, in the last year or so. If you Google "Calais" and "jungle," you get 70 million results. If you google "Calais" and "croissant," you get just half a million results. And what's the image this is planting in your mind? It's planting in your mind the idea that migrants are like wild animals, to be afraid of, they are dangerous, they represent a threat to you. And this is a very dangerous metaphor because this is the language of genocide, it's the language of hate. It's the same metaphor that Hitler used against the Jews depicting them as snakes. It's the same language which was used in Rwandan genocide by the Hutu against the Tutsi; they were described as cockroaches. And so it should be of intense concern to us that this is a phrase that is being used now by the mainstream media to talk about some of the most vulnerable people on our planet. Let's take one more; "The financial storm". The financial storm for the financial crisis. Was the financial crisis really an act of nature as the storm metaphor suggests? So it has nothing to do with greedy bankers? Or timid politicians? Or ineffective regulators? The storm plants a phoney image in our minds that this is something that just swept in, naturally and equally, will just sweep away with no need for action on our parts. It's a big lie. Pope Francis knows that it's a big lie. And so he doesn't speak using the financial storm metaphor. He has a different metaphor. He talks about the dung heap of capitalism. And so there he is using the metaphor of shit, which is wonderful because what he is calling for, he is demanding a clean-up of the whole system. And this is a metaphor that every human being on the planet can instantly understand, will be instantly disgusted by, and this is a metaphor that can get a giggle from time to time. So falling into this metaphorical space is one that some of our funnier politicians do from time to time. Boris Johnson, back in the UK, he's talked about how the labor leader emanated from the bowels of the trade union movement. In my time working in government we had Tony Blair and Gordon Brown described as two cheeks of the same arse. And Ronald Reagan once talked about government as a baby with a huge appetite at one end, no sense of responsibility at the other. So let's move on to number five. Exaggeration. When we're emotional, our perspective distorts. This manifests in our speech. And people who are emotional about something will therefore go over the top. So, "My god, I've been waiting to give this talk my whole life. I didn't sleep at all last night, and I am going to give my heart and soul to you." Okay, these are all exaggerative statements. Leaders do this kind of stuff all the time. You might think it's out of order, but in actual fact, exaggeration is just part and parcel of ordinary conversation. So they're just replicated in the kind of things that we do naturally when we do that. Let's move on to number six; rhyme. There is research showing people are more likely to believe something is true if it rhymes than if it does not rhyme, which feels absurd but it's down to what linguists talk about as the processing fluency of language; how easy is language to swallow? If you speak using long words and long sentences, it's like giving someone a steak and asking them to swallow it. Whereas if you give them something pithy, like a rhyme, it's like asking them to just sip on some Prosecco. And we learn things through rhymes from the moment that we're toddlers. "One, two, buckle my shoe." And so rhymes are signifiers of truth in our society, so they can often be used therefore to conceal fallacies. I don't know if any of you remember the OJ Simpson case. "If it doesn't fit, you must acquit." Yeah? "An apple a day keeps the doctor away." It sounds simple, it sounds true, but my god we could save some healthcare spending if that really was up to it, wasn't it? Another one in the UK; we all learn spelling through this line "I before E, except after C," which would be great if only it were true. But it's complete nonsense. There's just 44 examples of words in which that's true. There's 900 examples of words in which it is not true. I once presented this to a room full of people who worked in the city, and they said, "Oh yeah, we've got one; you've got to speculate to accumulate." Argh! Maybe the whole financial crisis was predicated on a rhyming fallacy. If only the bankers had been going around saying to one another, "Speculation leads to liquidation," perhaps, we wouldn't have been in this mess that we are in. So there we go. There are the six steps. And using these six steps you can make the most absurd arguments sound plausible. Why? If you're into ancient rhetoric, because they work their way through ethos, pathos, logos. If you prefer thinking about persuasion in terms of neuroscience, they work because they speak to the instinctive, emotional, and logical reins. And so I'm gong to demonstrate this now. I'd like one of you to throw me an issue. And I will jam a speech out for you; I will improvise the speech. So who would like to suggest a topic for me to... Seriously, go on. (Audience yell out) Donald Trump? (Laughter) (Applause) Do you want me to go for or against? For or against? (Audience yell out) For. (Laughter) Right. Plain-speaking. Honest. Authoritative. America's been waiting for someone to grab it by the scruff of its neck, and pick it up. America's been waiting for a politician who can dare to tell the truth. America's been waiting for someone who can really show leadership. Trump's being knocked by the liberal establishment, but he is winning support from the people. That's because he is not spinning; he is telling it like it is. And he's not just speaking to America at its heart, but he is speaking to a truth across the world now. The world has been waiting for enlightenment from someone like Trump for a long while now. And I tell you what, all of us here in Verona today, we ought to be thanking our lucky stars that for once we've got genuine political debate taking place in the United States. Maybe, who knows, we might get something like this in Europe one day. Stranger things have happened. So... If you think about Trump that he is someone we should dump, then to all of you in the EU, I say, "Fuck you!" (Laughter) (Applause) Thank you. I would just like to make it absolutely clear for the record, I think we should dump Trump. (Laughter) (Applause) He is a chump. Thank you. It's a playful exercise, but the point I am making here is very serious. The reason we all used to learn rhetoric at school was because it was seen as a basic entry point to society. How could society be fair, unless everyone had equal ability to articulate and express themselves? Without it, your legal systems, your political systems, your financial systems are not fair. And so it should be of intense concern to all of us that education in this has been narrowed to a very small and powerful elite. In Britain, there is one school that teaches rhetoric, and that is Eton. 19 of our last 50 Prime Ministers went to this school. So did our current Mayor of London, so did our Archbishop of Canterbury. It is absolutely scandalous that when in the world we're dealing with such huge challenges - financial inequalities, the apocalyptic threat of climate change, religious persecution unmatched since the 1940s, - that we should be restricting debate to such a narrow minority. Instead of teaching our children to sit down and shut up, we should be teaching them to stand up and speak out. So let's revive rhetoric. Let's really reinvigorate debate around the world, and let's really give every child on the planet a chance to become a leader. What should we call this grand initiative? Well, here is an idea. How about "democracy"? (Applause) Thank you.

How to speak so that people will listen:
The human voice: It's the instrument we all play. It's the most powerful sound in the world, probably. It's the only one that can start a war or say "I love you." And yet many people have the experience that when they speak, people don't listen to them. And why is that? How can we speak powerfully to make change in the world? What I'd like to suggest, there are a number of habits that we need to move away from. I've assembled for your pleasure here seven deadly sins of speaking. I'm not pretending this is an exhaustive list, but these seven, I think, are pretty large habits that we can all fall into. First, gossip. Speaking ill of somebody who's not present. Not a nice habit, and we know perfectly well the person gossiping, five minutes later, will be gossiping about us. Second, judging. We know people who are like this in conversation, and it's very hard to listen to somebody if you know that you're being judged and found wanting at the same time. Third, negativity. You can fall into this. My mother, in the last years of her life, became very negative, and it's hard to listen. I remember one day, I said to her, "It's October 1 today," and she said, "I know, isn't it dreadful?" (Laughter) It's hard to listen when somebody's that negative. (Laughter) And another form of negativity, complaining. Well, this is the national art of the U.K. It's our national sport. We complain about the weather, sport, about politics, about everything, but actually, complaining is viral misery. It's not spreading sunshine and lightness in the world. Excuses. We've all met this guy. Maybe we've all been this guy. Some people have a blamethrower. They just pass it on to everybody else and don't take responsibility for their actions, and again, hard to listen to somebody who is being like that. Penultimate, the sixth of the seven, embroidery, exaggeration. It demeans our language, actually, sometimes. For example, if I see something that really is awesome, what do I call it? (Laughter) And then, of course, this exaggeration becomes lying, and we don't want to listen to people we know are lying to us. And finally, dogmatism. The confusion of facts with opinions. When those two things get conflated, you're listening into the wind. You know, somebody is bombarding you with their opinions as if they were true. It's difficult to listen to that. So here they are, seven deadly sins of speaking. These are things I think we need to avoid. But is there a positive way to think about this? Yes, there is. I'd like to suggest that there are four really powerful cornerstones, foundations, that we can stand on if we want our speech to be powerful and to make change in the world. Fortunately, these things spell a word. The word is "hail," and it has a great definition as well. I'm not talking about the stuff that falls from the sky and hits you on the head. I'm talking about this definition, to greet or acclaim enthusiastically, which is how I think our words will be received if we stand on these four things. So what do they stand for? See if you can guess. The H, honesty, of course, being true in what you say, being straight and clear. The A is authenticity, just being yourself. A friend of mine described it as standing in your own truth, which I think is a lovely way to put it. The I is integrity, being your word, actually doing what you say, and being somebody people can trust. And the L is love. I don't mean romantic love, but I do mean wishing people well, for two reasons. First of all, I think absolute honesty may not be what we want. I mean, my goodness, you look ugly this morning. Perhaps that's not necessary. Tempered with love, of course, honesty is a great thing. But also, if you're really wishing somebody well, it's very hard to judge them at the same time. I'm not even sure you can do those two things simultaneously. So hail. Also, now that's what you say, and it's like the old song, it is what you say, it's also the way that you say it. You have an amazing toolbox. This instrument is incredible, and yet this is a toolbox that very few people have ever opened. I'd like to have a little rummage in there with you now and just pull a few tools out that you might like to take away and play with, which will increase the power of your speaking. Register, for example. Now, falsetto register may not be very useful most of the time, but there's a register in between. I'm not going to get very technical about this for any of you who are voice coaches. You can locate your voice, however. So if I talk up here in my nose, you can hear the difference. If I go down here in my throat, which is where most of us speak from most of the time. But if you want weight, you need to go down here to the chest. You hear the difference? We vote for politicians with lower voices, it's true, because we associate depth with power and with authority. That's register. Then we have timbre. It's the way your voice feels. Again, the research shows that we prefer voices which are rich, smooth, warm, like hot chocolate. Well if that's not you, that's not the end of the world, because you can train. Go and get a voice coach. And there are amazing things you can do with breathing, with posture, and with exercises to improve the timbre of your voice. Then prosody. I love prosody. This is the sing-song, the meta-language that we use in order to impart meaning. It's root one for meaning in conversation. People who speak all on one note are really quite hard to listen to if they don't have any prosody at all. That's where the word "monotonic" comes from, or monotonous, monotone. Also, we have repetitive prosody now coming in, where every sentence ends as if it were a question when it's actually not a question, it's a statement? (Laughter) And if you repeat that one, it's actually restricting your ability to communicate through prosody, which I think is a shame, so let's try and break that habit. Pace. I can get very excited by saying something really quickly, or I can slow right down to emphasize, and at the end of that, of course, is our old friend silence. There's nothing wrong with a bit of silence in a talk, is there? We don't have to fill it with ums and ahs. It can be very powerful. Of course, pitch often goes along with pace to indicate arousal, but you can do it just with pitch. Where did you leave my keys? (Higher pitch) Where did you leave my keys? So, slightly different meaning in those two deliveries. And finally, volume. (Loud) I can get really excited by using volume. Sorry about that, if I startled anybody. Or, I can have you really pay attention by getting very quiet. Some people broadcast the whole time. Try not to do that. That's called sodcasting, (Laughter) Imposing your sound on people around you carelessly and inconsiderately. Not nice. Of course, where this all comes into play most of all is when you've got something really important to do. It might be standing on a stage like this and giving a talk to people. It might be proposing marriage, asking for a raise, a wedding speech. Whatever it is, if it's really important, you owe it to yourself to look at this toolbox and the engine that it's going to work on, and no engine works well without being warmed up. Warm up your voice. Actually, let me show you how to do that. Would you all like to stand up for a moment? I'm going to show you the six vocal warm-up exercises that I do before every talk I ever do. Any time you're going to talk to anybody important, do these. First, arms up, deep breath in, and sigh out, ahhhhh, like that. One more time. Ahhhh, very good. Now we're going to warm up our lips, and we're going to go Ba, Ba, Ba, Ba, Ba, Ba, Ba, Ba. Very good. And now, brrrrrrrrrr, just like when you were a kid. Brrrr. Now your lips should be coming alive. We're going to do the tongue next with exaggerated la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la. Beautiful. You're getting really good at this. And then, roll an R. Rrrrrrr. That's like champagne for the tongue. Finally, and if I can only do one, the pros call this the siren. It's really good. It starts with "we" and goes to "aw." The "we" is high, the "aw" is low. So you go, weeeaawww, weeeaawww. Fantastic. Give yourselves a round of applause. Take a seat, thank you. (Applause) Next time you speak, do those in advance. Now let me just put this in context to close. This is a serious point here. This is where we are now, right? We speak not very well to people who simply aren't listening in an environment that's all about noise and bad acoustics. I have talked about that on this stage in different phases. What would the world be like if we were speaking powerfully to people who were listening consciously in environments which were actually fit for purpose? Or to make that a bit larger, what would the world be like if we were creating sound consciously and consuming sound consciously and designing all our environments consciously for sound? That would be a world that does sound beautiful, and one where understanding would be the norm, and that is an idea worth spreading. Thank you. (Applause)

Talk like Ted:
is the fear of public speaking on par with that for you then you should check this video you should always incorporate three important concepts into your speech now let's start with the first one your speech has to be emotional unleash the master with him if you are not excited about the thing you cannot make people excited about it you cannot inspire people while you are already bored find the topic that you have passion for passion is contagious inspire people with your enthusiasm don't be afraid of expressing yourself people love meaningful and sincere connections these workshops that perceive passion increases the likelihood of acceptance for the offer have you heard about neuroplasticity the brain actually grows and changes throughout life intense repetition of a task creates new stronger neural pathways that's why stop worrying about speaking in public being a decent speaker is easier than you think the more you're in the public the more the language area of the brain will become developed master the art of storytelling most people fill their presentations with facts and numbers all of these might seem necessary but it's not a good way to reach the audience you shall tell stories to reach people's hearts and minds this guy is brian stevenson he is the speaker who earned the longest standing ovation in that history what's his secret he spends 65 percent of his presentation telling stories stories stimulate and engage the human brain they help the speaker to connect with the audience they make it much more likely that the audience will agree with the speaker's point of view this guy is aristotle he is pretty good with the theories he believed that persuasion covers three components first is etos which corresponds to credibility second is logos which corresponds to logic evidence data turret is patos which is the act of appealing to emotions now analyze your speech how does your patter stack up against the rest if your emotional appeal is minimal immediately start adding these personal stories that are relevant stories of other relevant people stories of the relevant things like products or brands have a conversation practice relentlessly i mean seriously internalize your content so much that you can deliver your presentation like casual conversation match the pace of your verbal delivery with your natural conversation style own the knowledge and make everybody know that use gestures gestures actually give the audience confidence in the speaker don't be afraid to use your hands use them at key points whenever it feels natural don't try to imitate the gestures of others just be yourself let your story guide your moves don't overthink about them is a social psychologist at the harvard business school katy believes body language shapes who we are she says that how we use our bodies can change people's perceptions of us even if you don't feel confident act like it and your chances of success will greatly improve don't fake it till you make it fake it till you become it amikade secondly your speech should be novel teach me something new the human brain loves novelty and it hates generic boring stuff try to give the audience a new way of looking at the world yes it requires some creativity but you can do it experience new events people and places incorporate those new experiences into your presentations seth coden is a marketing genius he has a book titled purple call why because brown calls are boring put a little different zipping on your content give it a hook and your listeners will be far more receptive to your message if you can't explain your big idea in 140 characters or less keep working on your message the discipline brings clarity to your presentation it helps your audience recall the one big idea you are trying to teach them reveal information that's completely new to the audience or at least package the information differently try to offer a fresh and novel way to solve an old problem unleash your creativity to present your ideas deliver jaw dropping moments try to deliver shocking moments to the audience persuasion occurs when you reach a person's heart and head you will need evidence data and statistics to back up your argument make numbers meaningful memorable and jaw dropping by placing in a context that the audience can relate a statistic doesn't have to be boring does your presentation have data that is groundbreaking think about how you might package it and make it appealing to the listener every presentation needs one get one and use it plan the story first just as a movie director storyboards the scenes before beginning shooting create this story beforehand you will have plenty of time to design previous light sponsor story is complete but if this story is boring you will lose your audience before you speak a word lighten up the brain loves humor give your audience something to smile about stop taking yourself too seriously humor lovers defenses making your audience more receptive to your message it also makes you seem more likable and people are more willing to do business with someone they like dating sites show that the most desirable trait in a mate is sense of humor a crushing majority of 80 percent give this answer similarly your audience is turned on by humor arouse them their devotion will help you to be far more successful think back to stories and observations that have made you or your colleagues smile in the past if they work there wave them into your narrative and practice telling it you don't have to be a comedian if needed just call somebody else who said something funny it can be from famous people anonymous people or family and friends ted speakers do this all the time you can also incorporate a humorous photograph or video clip to lighten the mood humor involves some risk and most people don't have the courage for it this is why most presentations are awfully dry and boring it takes courage to be vulnerable to poke some good nature fun at yourself and your topic the key is to be authentic don't try to be someone you are not but if something makes you laugh there's a good chance it will make someone else love too finally your presentation has to be memorable stick to the 18 minute rule if you can't explain it simply you don't understand it well enough albert einstein researchers have discovered that too much information prevents the successful transmission of ideas the longer the presentation the more the listener has to organize comprehend and remember the burden increases along with the listeners anxiety they become increasingly frustrated even angry be sophisticated keep your presentations and pictures short and simple 18 minutes is the ideal length of time for representation if you must create one that's longer built in soft breaks every 10 minutes many effective tet presenters use three stories as the outline for their presentations step 1 create a twitter friendly headline step 2 sport the headline with 3 key messages step 3 reinforce 3 messages with stories statistics and examples paint a mental picture with multi-sensory experiences remember the brain does not pay attention to boring things it's nearly impossible to be both if you are exposed to mesmerizing images captivating videos visuals matter a lot in our brain pictures are processed in several channels instead of one that gives the brain a far deeper and meaningful encoding experience evidence shows that the concepts presented as pictures instead of words are more likely to be recalled if you hear information you are likely to remember about 10 percent of that information three days later add a picture to that and your recall rate will soar to sixty percent simply pictures will help you remember six times more information than listening to the words alone people will forget what you said people will forget what you did but people will never forget how you made them feel maya angelou don't think just about what you want people to know think about how you want them to feel once you force yourself to eliminate worthy slides you will realize how much more fun you can have step outside the slides every once in a while building demonstrations show products ask the audience to participate stay in your lane most people can spot a phony if you try to be someone that you are not you will fail to gain the trust of your audience present your content to a friend or spouse before you have to present it to the intended audience my mind went blank when i took the microphone i mumbled incoherently for a bit before leaving the podium it was one of the most embarrassing moments of my life and my face glowed red as the virgin logo richard branson branson committed himself to becoming a better speaker he practiced relentlessly billionaire investor warren buffett was also terrified of public speaking he was so nervous that he would arrange his college classes to avoid having to get up in front of people he even enrolled in a public speaking course but dropped out before even it started at the age of 21 buffett started his carrier and decided that he had to overcome his fear he enrolled in a dale carnegie course with other people who were terrified of getting up and saying names you have got to be able to communicate in life and it's enormously important schools to some extent underemphasize that if you can't communicate and talk to other people and get across your ideas you are giving up your potential warren buffett