Stars and Galaxies:
[Music] the night sky is a wonderful window to outer space there are lots of different types of celestial bodies out there and we'll discuss two of those today stars and galaxies stars stars are hot balls of burning gases that produce their own heat and light the most common example of a star is the sun the surface of stars is extremely hot the temperatures range from 2500° C to about 50,000 de C even the sun is extremely hot at 5,500 de C on its surface now stars are born at a particular point and then they have their life and then in the end they experience death just like us humans and even just like humans experience stages in life Stars also experience youth midlife and then old age pretty interesting right okay let's move on to the types of stars we'll discuss a few types of stars there are many more we'll discuss a few types of stars first type sunlike Stars second type red giants the third type is a supernova all these three stars are experienced at different stages of the life of a star now it's not necessary every star becomes a red giant at some point or a supernova but it's something that's often commonly experienced by stars okay let's begin with sunlike stars sunlike stars like it suggests are like the sun these are stars that have similar brightness temperature and age as the sun let me give you an example look at this picture here on the left we have the Sun on the right we have a star which looks very similar to the Sun and in fact its temperature and its brightness is also very similar to the Sun and so it it falls into the category of a sunlike star this stage is often experienced during the Youth of the star let's go to the next type of star a red giant as the word suggests it's really huge and red in color here's a picture of a red giant a red giant is a star in its midlife it's at the middle stages of a star a red giant is 10 times to a thousand times the size of the sun but even though it's much bigger than the sun it's actually a lot cooler than the sun interesting right okay let's go to the third type the Supernova now it's actually very rare to see see a supernova a supernova is what a star might go through just before its death a supernova is that stage of the star when it experiences a huge explosion just before before its death so let me show you a short animation of a supernova explosion look at this star it's going to contract become smaller and boom explode that was a supernova explosion now well while this is just an animation let me show you a real life picture taken using a telescope of a supernova stunning isn't it a supernova is about 100 times the size of the sun and it's much much much much hotter than the sun it's yeah that many degrees C that's a billion degrees C or 100 CR degrees cus that's extremely hot right okay now we discuss the types of stars depending on the stage in which they were in let's discuss two more types of stars which are segregated on the basis of their configuration binary stars and variable Stars okay let's begin binary Stars by as the word suggests is uh basically referring to two stars revolving around each other let me show you a picture this is our star one and this is our star two so these are two stars which are actually close to each other and revolving around each other let me show you a short animation so that you can imagine better how these Stars can revolve around each other fascinating isn't it okay okay next we've got variable stars now variable stars are stars whose brightness varies over a very short period of time for example look at this image here do don't you think one of them is a little brighter than the other one don't you think the left side one is a little brighter and and if you actually looked at the picture it says that the left side one has been taken on Jan 2019 right and the right side one was taken in December 2019 basically what's happened is this Stars brightness has increased over time now you might wonder wait a minute what's the big deal about this when I go out and look at the night sky I see something like this I See Stars twinkling their brightness increases and decreases increases and decreases pretty much every Star does that what's the big deal here no this is not twinkling because twinkling is because of the dust in the atmosphere and because of the different gases in the atmosphere this is not that this is an increase in the amount of light provided by the star or a decrease in the amount of light provided by the star so we've discussed a lot about stars now we'll move to galaxies a galaxy is a collection of stars planets and vast clouds of you know dust all of this in a galaxy is bound by gravity and that's why it sticks together an example of a galaxy is the Milky Way galaxy or the Andromeda galaxy on an average Galaxies have about a 100 million stars and that's just an average it could even have a trillion Stars so it's like a huge huge collection of stars let me show you a few shapes of galaxies galaxies could be like this ellipsoidal in shape like an egg galaxies could be weirdly shaped like this irregular galaxies galaxies could often be like this spiral Galax GES galaxies could be like this where they have a bar at the center and so they're called called B spiral galaxies the Galaxy in which we live the Milky Way galaxy is also a b spiral galaxy can you notice in the picture the location of the sun is also shown that's where we live that's our home now because we're at one end of the Milky Way galaxy we can see the other parts of the Milky Way galaxy on a clear night you might be able to see something like this in the sky and this is the other part of the Milky Way galaxy that's it for this video

Black holes:
Black holes are one of the strangest things in existence. They don't seem to make any sense at all. Where do they come from... ...and what happens if you fall into one? Stars are incredibly massive collections of mostly hydrogen atoms that collapsed from enormous gas cloud under their own gravity. In their core, nuclear fusion crushes hydrogen atoms into helium releasing a tremendous amount of energy This energy, in the form of radiation, pushes against gravity, maintaining a delicate balance between the two forces. As long as there is fusion in the core, a star remains stable enough. But for stars with way more mass then our own sun the heat and pressure at the core allow them to fuse heavier elements until they reach iron. Unlike all the elements that went before, the fusion process that creates iron doesn't generate any energy. Iron builds up at the center of the star until it reaches a critical amount and the balance between radiation and gravity is suddenly broken. The core collapses. Within a fraction of a second, the star implodes. Moving at about the quarter of the speed of light, feeding even more mass into the core. It's at this very moment that all the heavier elements in the universe are created, as the star dies, in a super nova explosion. This produces either a neutron star, or if the star is massive enough, the entire mass of the core collapses into a black hole. If you looked at a black hole, what you'd really be seeing is the event horizon. Anything that crosses the event horizon needs to be travelling faster than the speed of light to escape. In other words, its impossible. So we just see a black sphere reflecting nothing. But if the event horizon is the black part, what is the "hole" part of the black hole? The singularity. We're not sure what it is exactly. A singularity may be indefinitely dense, meaning all its mass is concentrated into a single point in space, with no surface or volume, or something completely different. Right now, we just don't know. its like a "dividing by zero"error. By the way, black holes do not suck things up like a vacuum cleaner, If we were to swap the sun for an equally massive black hole, nothing much would change for earth, except that we would freeze to death, of course. what would happen to you if you fell into a black hole? The experience of time is different around black holes, from the outside, you seem to slow down as you approach the event horizon, so time passes slower for you. at some point, you would appear to freeze in time, slowly turn red, and disapear. While from your perspective, you can watch the rest of the universe in fast forward, kind of like seeing into the future. Right now, we don't know what happens next, but we think it could be one of two things: One, you die a quick death. A black hole curves space so much, that once you cross the event horizon, there is only one possible direction. you can take this - literally - inside the event horizon, you can only go in one direction. Its like being in a really tight alley that closes behind you after each step. The mass of a black hole is so concentrated, at some point even tiny distances of a few centimeters, would means that gravity acts with millions of times more force on different parts of your body. Your cells get torn apart, as your body stretches more and more, until you are a hot stream of plasma, one atom wide. Two, you die a very quick death. Very soon after you cross the event horizon, you would hit a firewall and be terminated in an instant. Neither of these options are particularly pleasant. How soon you would die depends on the mass of the black hole. A smaller black hole would kill you before you even enter its event horizon, while you probably could travel inside a super size massive black hole for quite a while. As a rule of thumb, the further away from the singularity you are, the longer you live. Black holes come in different sizes. There are stellar mass black holes, with a few times the mass of sun, and the diameter of an asteroid. And then there are the super massive black holes, which are found at the heart of every galaxy, and have been feeding for billions of years. Currently, the largest super massive black hole known, is S5 0014+81. 40 billion times the mass of our sun. It is 236.7 billion kilometers in diameter, which is 47 times the distance from the sun to Pluto. As powerful as black holes are, they will eventually evaporate through a process called Hawking radiation. To understand how this works, we have to look at empty space. Empty space is not really empty, but filled with virtual particles popping into existence and annihilating each other again. When this happens right on the edge of a black hole, one of the virtual particles will be drawn into the black hole, and the other will escape and become a real particle. So the black hole is losing energy. This happens incredibly slowly at first, and gets faster as the black hole becomes smaller. When it arrives at the mass of a large asteroid, its radiating at room temperature. When it has the mass of a mountain, it radiates with about the heat of our sun. and in the last second of its life, the black hole radiates away with the energy of billions of nuclear bombs in a huge explosion. But this process is incredibly slow, The biggest black holes we know, might take up a googol year to evaporate. This is so long that when the last black hole radiates away, nobody will be around to witness it.