These are transcripts from three videos on learning. Combine the best:

Tell me what you think of this, what I always call, protocol, if I want to learn something from a manuscript I read or a book chapter, I used to highlight things. And I had a very elaborate, extracted from my university days, system of stars and exclamation marks and underline that mean a lot to me, that, yes, bring me back to a given segment within the chapter. But a few years ago, I was teaching a course in the biology department at Stanford, and for some reason, we had them read a study about information retention. And I learned from that study that one of the best things we can do is read information, in whatever form, a magazine, research article, et cetera, a book, and then to take some time away from that material, maybe walk, maybe close one's eyes, maybe leave them open, doesn't matter, and just try and remember specific elements. How much does one remember? Then go back to the material and look at it. And I've just been positively astonished at how much more information I can learn when I'm not simply going through motor commands of just underlining things and highlighting them, but stepping away and thinking, "Okay, yeah, oh, I don't remember how many subjects there were. I'll go back and check that, maybe make a note. And okay, they did this, then they did that, and then," and then it's crystallized. And as I say this, I realize, of course this should work, [laughing] this is the way that the brain learns. But somehow, that's not the way we are taught to learn. Yeah, well, I'm smiling because when I was 22, I wrote this book called "How to Become a Straight-A Student," right? And the whole premise of the book was, "I'm going to talk to actual college students who have straight A's and who don't seem completely ground out, right? Like, not burnt out. And I'm just going to interview 'em, right?" And the protocol was, "How did you study for the last test that you studied for? How did you take notes for the last?" So I was just asking them to walk through their methodology. The core idea of that book was active recall. That was the core idea, that replicating ideas, what I used to say is, "Replicating the information from scratch as if teaching a class without looking at your notes." That is the only way to learn. And the thing about it was, it's a trade off. it's efficient, doesn't take much time, but it's incredibly mentally taxing, right? This is why students often avoid it. It is difficult to sit there and try to replicate and pull forth, "Okay, what did I read here? How did that work?" It's mentally very taxing, but it's very time efficient, right? If you're willing to essentially put up with that, with that pain, you learn very quickly. And not only do you learn very quickly, you don't forget. It's almost like you have a pseudo-photographic memory when you study this way. You sit down to do a test and you're replicating whole lines [laughing] from what you studied, the ideas sort of come out fully formed because it's such a fantastic way to actually learn. It was my key, the whole premise that got me writing that book is I went through this period as a college student where I came in freshman year, was a fine student, not a great student, but a fine student. I was rowing crew and I was sort of excited to do that. And then I developed a heart condition, and had to stop. Congenital wiring in the heart, atrial flutter thing. It meant I couldn't row crew anymore. So a prolapse of some sort? It was a circuitry issue that would lead to a extremely rapid heartbeat. It's like really rapid, like tachycardia, right? You get 200-250 beats a minute just, and it could be exercise induced, right? Which is not optimal, you could take beta blockers, which would moderate the electrical timing, but beta blockers reduce your max heart rate. And if you're a athlete where the entire thing that matters is your max heart rate, so you're doing something like a 2,000-meter rows, your performance on beta blockers just goes down. It makes no sense, it's like being a basketball player that wears weighted shoes, it's too frustrating. Right, and it also makes you super mellow. I was a pretty mellow guy. But I was a worst rower. So I stopped that, and I was like, "Okay, I want to get serious about my studies." I said, "I can get serious about my studies and writing," right? That's when I actually made the decisions that I then stuck with for the next 25 years after that. But one of the things I did to get serious about my studies is I said, "I'm going to systematically experiment with how to study for tests and how to write papers." And I would try this, "How did it go?" deconstruct experiment. Try this, "How'd it go?" deconstruct experiment. And active recall was the thing that turned me all around. And so I went from a pretty good student to 4.0 every single quarter, Sophomore year, junior year, senior year. I got one A minus [laughing] between my sophomore year through my senior year. It was like this miraculous transformation. It was active recall. I rebuilt all of my studying, so if it was for a humanities class, I had a whole way of taking notes that was all built around doing active recall. For math classes, my main study tool was a stack of white paper. "All right, do this proof," white piece of paper, and just, "Can I do it from scratch?" If I could, I know that technique. If I don't, "All right, I'm going to come back and try it again later."` Completely transformed. I did so well academically, that's why I ended up writing that book that basically spread that message to other people. So I'm a huge advocate for active recall. It's really hard, but it is the way to learn new things. And as you pointed out, it is very time efficient. Oh yeah. Yeah. I mean, it was a problem, it was a social problem for me that I would have to pretend [laughing] during finals period that I was going to the library to study because I would be done studying. This active recall, it's brutal, but it's incredibly efficient. You sit down there, I would have my cards and I would mark it, "Okay, I struggled with this," I'd put it in this pile, "I got it done," I'd put it in this pile. And so then you would just go back to the, "I struggled with it," pile, and work on that. And then make a new, "I struggled with it," pile. And these would exponentially decay. And so in a few hours, you could really master, with a few other tricks that worked, you could really master the material pretty quickly. And then, what am I supposed to do? I didn't do all-nighters. It wouldn't make any sense. Active recall is how you prepare, and it's going to take four hours and it's going to be tough, so do it in the morning when you have energy, and then you're done. I love it. I learned essentially all of neuroanatomy looking down the microscope at tissue samples. And then I would try and take photographs with my eyes, I do not have a photographic memory. But then I would get home in the evening, look through the neuroanatomy textbook, lie down, and try and fly through the different circuits in my mind. And then if I arrived at a structure in the brain that I couldn't identify, I would then go check my notes and go back. Ah, that's perfect. So basically, I learned neuroanatomy, which I'm poor at a great many things in life, but neuroanatomy, I'm solid at, and then some, if I may say so. And it's because there's a mental map, and you can kind of move through it, fly through it dynamically. Thank you for tuning into the Huberman Lab Clips channel. If you enjoyed the clip that you just viewed, please check out the full-length episode by clicking here.

so this video is part of our ongoing series called study skills where we show you different learning techniques with examples so they can apply them yourself okay I tried just about every memory technique out there and since I've been through Medical School I've had a lot of time to experiment I came across the fundamentals of how memory and the Brain work from the books Limitless and moonwalking with Einstein and I learned that almost all memory techniques can be boiled down to three simple Steps step one is to visualize our brains remember images much better than numbers or words like when I say apple you instantly think of the red fruit or maybe you think of the iPhone but either way your brain is not thinking of the text a-p-p-l-e so step one is to take everything you need to memorize and turn it into an image whether it's a list of drugs or steps to a chemical reaction or I don't know dates to a battle everything can become an image for example the number nine to me is a cat because a cat has nine lives if something is uncommon or rare then to me it's a zebra if if you know what I'm talking about comment below but for a more complicated example let's say I wanted to remember that labetalol is a blood pressure medicine that's safe to use during pregnancy labetalol to me is a betta fish laughing out loud so I could imagine that a betta fish is laughing at a baby and to take this a step further if I have the scene drawn in a specific location like in the corner of a mind map then I'd be using visual spatial memory step two is to structure there are many ways to do this because the brain is good at remembering things like stories acronyms mnemonics alliteration rhymes and so on so what we want to do once we've turned all of our info into images is to link the images together using some sort of structure in med school we had to memorize the cranial nerves which control our senses so like one does smell tuda's vision and so on so for example once I've converted all the cranial nerves into images I could then imagine each of those images on each of my Knuckles that's called the knuckle method or I can imagine the images in specific areas in my house or in my bedroom that's the mine Palace or I can tell a story about the images and have them interact with each other in some sort of order for example once upon a time a nose gave birth to two children Cyclops and sleepy and so on so on that's called the story method or the link method and the best part about this is you only need to remember the first item and the story should just naturally flow there's also this cool program called sketchy.com I know this is not sponsored by them they're just a really good example of what I'm talking about they take all these complicated medical topics and turn them into visual storyboards for us then they tell us a narrative to make memorizing these things like drugs bacteria and diseases so much easier another tip for linking is to chunk things together like normally we don't think of a phone number as 10 individual digits we chunk them together so that the brain only has to process three individual units another tip is to make the stories interesting and what do our brains find interesting action humor and sex so for example don't just turn in image into a ninja you want to make it Vivid like tell a story about how the violent ninja would assassinate people and make it sexual like how he would use naked women to beat his toughest opponents and step three is repetition whenever we practice recalling things from memory that knowledge becomes stronger in med school my favorite way to use repetition was through flashcards because flashcards utilize multiple strategies that boost our memory active recall space repetition and interleaving each of those could be their own entire videos so if you're unfamiliar with these topics I'll link them here or in the description another tip for using flash cards is to put the images and stories you made from steps one and two onto your flashcards to make the most out of this entire memory system so now I'm going to do a walkthrough of all the tips that we've mentioned so far and try to memorize the shoulder muscles and I'm gonna try to not go too deep on the medical stuff so focus more on my thought process rather than the info itself so for this particular exam there are four muscles I need to know their names I need to know how each muscle moves the arm and and I need to know what test to perform like if a patient comes in complaining of shoulder pain I need to know how to maneuver the arm to figure out which muscle is injured so that's 12 different things I got to memorize but I can chunk things together and reduce the total amount of things I need to memorize by just taking more time to understand the big picture Concepts so an important concept here is that if the muscle raises the arm then an injury to the muscle makes it hard to raise the arm and the test you want to do applies pressure against raising the arm basically what I'm saying is that column two and column 3 are opposites of each other so if I memorize one column then I know the opposite is the other column so I've essentially chunked those two columns together reducing 12 things down to eight now we can start to memorize first is turning things into images Terry's minor to me is Terry McGinnis Batman Beyond and a side note here is that we all have unique ways to visualize Things based on our unique interests personally I use a lot of images from comics and Anime but you can use what's most memorable to you anyways I've turned the muscles and their tests into images the test for the teres minor is abduction and internal rotation which looks like you're throwing a baseball so the image to me is a baseball the test for the supraspinatus looks like you're emptying a cup so the image is spilled coffee the test for the infraspinatus looks like you're backhand slapping someone so to me it's a slap and the test for the subscapularis looks like you're arresting someone so it's a pair of handcuffs then looking here I can actually chunk these two muscles together because they share the same root words spinatus meaning spine and I wanted an image that would reference the spine so I chose Professor X because his origin story is that he got shot in the spine and then I can chunk even further by combining the images of the muscles and the images of the tests so now this image of Terry throwing a baseball to me represents multiple pieces of information it represents the Terry's minor muzzle the way that you test for that muscle is to make the patient do a baseball throwing motion and the opposite of that motion is how the Terry's minor muscle moves the arm and likewise I've chunked all the other images of the muscles with their corresponding tests step two is to link the images together and going on for example here I could tell a story Terry threw a baseball at the professor's spine causing him to Spill the coffee on himself it hurt so much that he accidentally slaps Sub-Zero they got in a fight and then Sub-Zero got arrested it's a little over the top I'd say but remember you want to try to make it as memorable as possible with things like action violence humor sex but notice that this story has been now chunked down to only three plot points yet in my head it represents the original 12 pieces of information and you can really do this for hundreds of pieces of info right this is how someone would memorize pi to the nth degree or memorize an entire deck of cards in exact order after seeing it only once so for step 3 I'll put this story into a space repetition flash card and it doesn't have to even be drawn out on the flash card since I used a story that flows so I can just put the first character as a memorization cue and I would run through the rest of the story in my head hopefully you saw my thought process here understand first memorize second and always be looking for ways to chunk things together if you want some tips on how to understand and structure information then I recommend you check out this quick tutorial right here I'll see you there

in this video I'll teach you a system for remembering everything you read study or learn I've been using the system for the last 7 years starting from learning disease pathophysiology in medical school through to reading research articles and learning science or reading books on productivity or business and the reason the system works so consistently and so well is because it breaks down that process of reading into two distinct stages the first stage is the consumption period and the second stage is the digestion period most people think that by focusing on the first stage and consuming more information they'll be able to therefore remember and apply more information so they focus on trying to read faster or watching lectures at triple speed or binge listening to audio books or watching hours of YouTube tutorials but that is not how learning works and once we understand how learning does work you'll see why my system is so effective you see when it comes to remembering and applying information it's much less about what comes in to your brain and it's much more about how much stays in your brain and that is what the second stage the digestion period is all about and it's the part that is often neglected so teach you a system for mastering both of these stages which in turn increases your Aurora retention as well as your ability to actually use the knowledge in the way that you need to but first we need to ask ourselves is it even possible to remember everything you read and the short answer is no but here's the secret trying to remember everything we read should not be the goal in the first place and we know this because of a man who actually could remember everything this man's name is Kim Peak and his story is so crazy that Hollywood made an entire movie about him Kim Peak was a mega genius and his memory was ridiculous he was able to memorize a book with such perfect recall that after reading a book one time he would be able to write it out word for word with every comma and full stop back to front he memorized so many maps and atlases that he could give you driving directions between any two cities in the world and the path that he gave you was mentally calculated to be the shortest distance now the reason K had such supernatural abilities is because of a very rare medical condition he had called FG syndrome he was born with macroy which means he had a larger brain and he had no Corpus colossum which is basically the bundle of neurons that connect both hemispheres of the brain together in scientists believe that because he didn't have the normal pattern of neurons his brain adapted and developed Ved new connections to compensate which I guess gave him like superhuman memory now I want you to imagine that both you and Kim Peak were about to sit the same exam who do you think would do better and the answer is that it actually depends on the exam you see despite his superhuman memory Kim Peak struggled with reasoning and problem solving which means that if the exam was at the junior levels of schooling which often tests on the lower levels of of learning which involve a lot of memorization and recall then Kim Peak would definitely win but if the exam was at a higher level like University or postgraduate where the reasoning and problem solving the higher orders of learning are examined as a higher priority then you may actually have the edge now for most of you listening probably using the knowledge you have consumed to reason and problem solve is kind of the whole point of why you're trying to read and remember in the first place which basically means that it is not enough to remember everything which is good because for most people that's not possible anyway but it is possible to remember everything you need to remember in such a way that we can use that knowledge in the way we need to and that is what the system that I'll teach you helps you to achieve so to start using the system we have to understand that not all information is equal in fact I break down the information that I read into five different categories using the acronym Pacer and it's important to be able to identify which category the information you're reading to belongs to because for each category there are specific targeted processes that then help you to deal with and manage that information more effectively and when we use the wrong process for the specific category of information it makes remembering and understanding what you read much harder much more timec consuming and much less effective and that you're more likely to forget what you read it also increases the chance of you entering the passive mode of reading which is where you get to the bottom of a page and you can't even remember what you just read so the system goes like this in the first part where we are consuming information we want to identify which category what we are consuming belongs to using the Pacer acronym then during stage two we digest what we have read using the targeted process for that category which takes the information and stores it in our long-term memory through the process called encoding so let's go through Pacer together so that you can accurately identify the category of information you're trying to remember the p and Pacer stands for procedural and procedural information is any information that tells you how something should be executed for example this is a book that I used during medical school that taught me about how to do a clinical examination like listen to a heartbeat or take someone's blood pressure and a lot of the information in this book is about the correct technique to perform the examination and some subjects and domains have a lot of procedural information some great examples of this would be coding and languages the targeted process for working with with and mastering this type of procedural information is practice the key is that you want to apply procedural information in real life as early as possible a lot of people will spend time to read it and memorize it and write lots of notes about it and then a week or two later they'll try to practice it but by then it's too late we've already forgotten a lot of it and a lot of that time is just wasted instead as soon as you take that procedural information into your brain try to apply it and practice it as early as you can now straight away we run into a problem with using this approach what if we're reading something and we don't have time to practice it right now the answer is you either move on to something else or you stop consuming anything and you wait until you have time to practice it but you do not waste your time trying to just memor memorize it on the spot because here is the crucial part about learning that everyone overlooks the two stages of consuming and digesting must always be balanced everything you consume must be digested in order for you to retain and use it only when stage one is followed by stage two does learning actually occur if we're reading something and we don't have time time to use the right process like practice then most people will say oh well I don't have time right now I'm just going to get through as much of it as I can and they spend more time reading and reading and essentially just consuming more and more but this is the learning equivalent of overeating they haven't had a chance to digest it so they're just going to end up vomiting it all up again through the mental vomiting process we call forgetting which is why for most people the amount that they forget after reading is extremely high with some studies suggesting that up to 90% of what is consumed is forgotten despite hours of consuming and if we're forgetting 90% of what we read rather than consuming more and taking time away from the digesting it actually makes more sense to spend less time consuming and more time on the digesting and processing this increases your retention with which therefore increases the amount of working knowledge you're able to build so earlier I said what goes into your brain is less important than what stays in your brain and this principle of balancing stage one consuming with stage two digesting is important not just for procedural information but for every other category of PESA unfortunately stage two digesting is almost completely neglected for the second category of in the a of Pacer which stands for analogous analogous information is actually one of the easiest types of information to work with and remember and apply because analogous information is the information that is related to something you already have prior knowledge about and even if we don't have direct prior knowledge about it it may remind us indirectly of something that we do have knowledge about for example let's say that we are an avid swimmer and we're learning about the physiology of a muscle contraction when we look at that muscle contraction cycle we might think hey that reminds me a lot about the swimming technique I use and by connecting the new information about muscle contraction physiology with what we already know our swimming technique we have created an analogy and so that is analogous information and analogies can form with any prior knowledge including knowledge within a topic itself in most fields of study there are Concepts or patterns of Concepts and relationships that tend to repeat and recur throughout that field you might have learned about how to solve a particular type of problem last semester and now this semester this new problem solving approach that you're learning for the first time reminds you a lot of that old problem solving process and relating those two approaches is also an analogy so when we're engaging in stage one the consumption period of reading we want to actively be thinking about whether what we are reading is related to something that we already have knowledge about and once we identify it as potentially analogous information the targeted process we want to use here is critique this is the part I said everyone misses once we create an analogy critiquing it means we examine critically how good that analogy actually is for example with the analogy of muscle contraction and swimming technique critiquing that analogy means asking ourselves in what way specifically are these two things similar or related to each other in what ways are they different in what situation does this analogy not make sense anymore and if there are a lot of differences or a lot of conditions and situations where the analogy breaks apart then is there a better analogy or can we extend or modify that analogy to make it more comprehensive and more accurate this critiquing process massively drives up our attention and depth of understanding of this new information and the reason this works is because instead of new information just being new information that your brain doesn't know what to do with we're actually extending it from what we already know we're taking our existing Network and connecting it to the new information straight away which is the reason why creating analogies has been shown in studies repeatedly to be so powerful for our retention and understanding now at this point you might be looking at the system and thinking this seems a little forced it doesn't feel natural and you're right in fact it's crucial that you understand that this is not natural and that's why it works if you have no time pressure and it doesn't matter how well you learn something then you can learn and read however you want but unfortunately what research has shown is that there are clear biological limitations of the human brain to how much it can consume and store into our memory in one go and in the modern day when there is so much we have to learn it is very very easy to exceed that biological limit and then get overwhelmed learning is extremely complicated so to be able to learn a lot in a short amount of time reach a high level of knowledge a lot of processes need to go right and this is why most people will Plateau on their learning ability and after a point not really improve for the rest of their lives for me figuring out what processes to care about and therefore what to improve on and then how to even execute on those correctly took me at least 7 or 8 years of almost constant experimentation and reading of research and coaching people to see what works for them and honestly I got lucky because 10 15 years ago a lot of the research didn't even exists which is why to make it easier for you I've started a free Weekly Newsletter I take everything that I've learned that helps you become a more efficient learner the things that have the highest chance of giving you success in a short amount of time and I packaged them in a way that you can take and Implement into your own learning in less than 10 15 minutes if you want to sign up to the newsletter it's completely free I'll leave a link in the description for you now getting back to peser you might notice that the way that I've written the a in PESA is is like this it's this kind of strange shape there the reason is because a the analogous information can exist within as a subset of procedural information for example you could create an analogy on a set of instructions to make it simpler and easier for you to understand and then later you go and practice it but analogous information also exists as a subset within the next category of information which is the C of Paca and this stands for conceptual if procedural information is the how to do something then conceptual information is the what and for most science subjects the majority of what you need to learn is conceptual conceptual information includes facts and explanations theories and principles relationships between Concepts and ways that that concept can be applied and in most cases we need both the procedural and the conceptual knowledge to solve a problem and apply our knowledge properly for example although this book goes through how to listen to someone's heart I still need to have the conceptual knowledge about what I'm listening to to be able to analyze that and make a conclusion on the diagnosis so when we identify that a piece of text we're reading is conceptual type information the process we want to use straight away is mapping nonlinear network based note taking such as mind mapping is an efficient way of increasing your attention and Mastery of conceptual knowledge because conceptual knowledge inherently exists in a network although a textbook or a lecture might be delivered word after word in a linear format if we look at the mind and knowledge of the person that wrote that textbook it doesn't exist in a linear sentence by sentence structure their knowledge and expertise exists in a highly connected network of information there is no innate sequence of information an expert can start at any point and navigate to any other point this is what allows an expert to do complex problem solving because they can look at a problem understand what concepts are related and see how those Concepts connect together to solve the problem whereas a beginner who's only learned it at a surface level just sees individual separated Concepts and they don't understand how they link together as a learner our job is not to remember the sequence word for word our job is to try to recreate that network of knowledge that the expert had and mapping is such a great technique because it forces us to not only think about each fact and concept but also how they connect to each other to form a bigger picture so when you are reading and consuming take some time to get out a piece of paper or a tablet and make a map of the things that you're learning and as you read more you add more to your map you move things around you reorganize things as you read more you also digest more and your map grows remember analogous information can also exist within conceptual information so you might find Opportunities within conceptual information to create some analogies and you might want to add those into your map as well even if the analogy doesn't make its way into the map it could give you an idea in terms of how you want to structure your ideas on your map now here's that same problem again let's say you reading but you don't have time to draw a map or maybe you don't have anything to map on while you're reading then again we need to slow down and consume less so that consumption and digestion can stay balanced and if you don't you'll just end up overwhelmed again and wasting time because not only are you going to forget a lot of what you are consuming but now you've given the future version of you more work to do by having to go and figure out what your forgotten and then Rec consume it again anyway now the good news is that the digesting of procedural analogous and conceptual information is easily the most timec consuming the E and the r of PESA are much faster and easier to deal with I talk about e and are together because they're both very similar to each other but pay close attention because the two are actually so similar to each other that most people never distinguish between the two and that can lead directly to hours of wasted time per week the E and Pacer stands for evidence evidence type information is the information that helps make conceptual information more concrete they're often very detailed sometimes very technical pieces of information but they're useful because we can use these facts or statistics or cases as examples to prove a conceptual point for example we could understand conceptually how World War I started but we also need to know the evidence information of date certain specific events occurred between which specific people at which specific location to make that concept more concrete and the key process for evidence type information is to store and rehearse store means that you just colle collect that information and note it down somewhere you could add it to your conceptual map you could add it to a second brain system using something like notion or Rome or obsidian or you can put it onto flashcards you could even just write them down on a document somewhere with all the other things that you are storing this should happen as soon as you identify it so as you are consuming the information and you identify that this piece of information is an Evidence type we go ahead and straight away store it the rehearsing part of it comes a little later we put aside time to do the rehearsal and rehearsing the information is the key to improving our retention of evidence type information rehearsing means that we think about how we will need to use this piece of information how are we going to apply it what type of conceptual information is this an example of we then challenge ourselves by using an applying that information in the way that we will need to use it this means solving problems or writing detailed answers to questions or creating explanations teaching it to other people or maybe writing essays that use that piece of evidence as a supporting example for a wider concept and so while we store the information while we consume it the rehearsing happens later maybe at the end of the day or at the end of the week but do not waste time while you are cons assuming trying to just memorize and read and reread and writing copious notes on that piece of information otherwise you are not going to have enough time for the PA and C the first three types of information which is what forms the foundation of knowledge that the evidence type needs to build off of in the first place now evidence type information is very similar to the final type which is the r of PESA and this stands for reference type information reference information is the easiest to deal with it is all of the Nitty Gritty very specific detailed bits of information that don't really change your conceptual understanding they're not particularly that important they're not analogous and they're not procedural but for whatever reason we might need to know this later this might be something like the exact value of a mathematical con Conant or a specific Gene involved in a particular mutation or the name of a very specific molecule of a disease or maybe a list of attributes used to define a variable for coding and the process we use to deal with this type of information is the same as for evidence almost it's store and rehearse the same things the storing part exactly the same you Chuck it in a second brand and your flash cards wherever makes sense for you but if you need to be able to record this information from memory and you can't like refer back to your notes when you need to use it then you probably want to use something like flash cards because the rehearse part is a little different because reference type information is by definition not very conceptually important anyway it's quite hard to use this for problem solving or as part of like an extended discussion or answer the way we're probably going to use this information is just Direct fact recoil which is why something like flash cards using a space repetition active recoil strategy like an app like ankey is going to be the best way to handle reference type information so as you're reading and you're thinking hey this might be a reference type information you dump it into your flashcards and you put aside like 30 minutes every day or whatever to just go through your flash cards to do your rehearsal but please again absolutely do not waste time while you're reading trying to just read and reread and write notes and just memorize this information at the time you need to use that time for the first three which forms the bulk of your knowledge as I said earlier there are a lot of things that need to go right to be able to learn a lot of information in a short period of time and wasting time on trying to memorize reference information while you are reading it instead of spending that time on the first three types is one of the worst offenders and as soon as you get into that mind frame of reading something and then rereading it again trying to get it into your head you can say goodbye to your learning efficiency so now you know the five types of information for you to try to identify as you consume in stage one and the appropriate targeted process that will help you to digest that information in stage two and the key to be able to retain a lot and have a good high level of knowledge for what you have consumed is to keep that stage one and stage two balanced however when it comes to learning efficiently this just scratches the surface in fact if you look at this map of learning that outlines the major processes that you need to be a consistently High performing efficient learner what we talked about today is like barely a few percent of it so if you want to start unpacking what those other processes look like without having to dedicate a decade of your life to uh learning about it like I did then make sure to check out my free newsletter the link is in the description thank you so much for watching and I will see you in the next one